README.md, before:

[![Tests](https://github.com/Dominik1123/click-inspect/workflows/Tests/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Dominik1123/click-inspect/actions?workflow=Tests)
[![Codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/Dominik1123/click-inspect/branch/main/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/Dominik1123/click-inspect)
[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/click-inspect.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/click-inspect/)
[![PyPI pyversions](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/click-inspect.svg?style=flat-square)](https://pypi.org/pypi/click-inspect/)

# click-inspect

*Add options to click commands based on inspecting functions*

## Installation

[`pip install click-inspect`](https://pypi.org/project/click-inspect/)

## Usage

Suppose an application containing an API function for which we would like to expose a command line interface. That function expects one or two arguments with internal data types and a bunch of configuration options. For example:

```python
def display_data(data: List[Tuple[int, int]],
                 *,
                 size: int, symbol: str = 'x', empty: str = ' ') -> str:
    """Display the given data points in a 2D ASCII grid.

    Args:
        data (list of (int, int)): The data points as x- and y-tuples.
        size (int): Size of the grid in both dimensions.
        symbol (str): Symbol for displaying data points.
        empty (str): Symbol for displaying empty space.

    Returns:
        str: The string containing the grid.
    """
    grid = [[empty]*size for _ in range(size)]
    for x, y in data:
        grid[y][x] = symbol
    top = bottom = ('+', *'-'*size, '+')
    grid = (top, *(('|', *row, '|') for row in grid), bottom)
    return '\n'.join(map(''.join, grid))
```

Here the type of the first argument, ``data``, is an internal aspect of the application, but the remaining arguments are generic options.

Now we want to create a [click](https://pypi.org/project/click/) interface for using this function from the command line. Specifically we want it to work on JSON files of the following format:

```json
{"data": [[1, 1], [2, 4], [3, 3]]}
```

So the only thing our command needs to do is to read the JSON file and convert the content in a way that it is compatible with what `display_data` expects:

```python
import json
import click


@click.command()
@click.argument('file')
def display(file):
    with open(file) as fh:
        data = json.load(fh)['data']
    data = [[int(x) for x in row] for row in data]
    print(display_data(data))


if __name__ == '__main__':
    display()
```

Then we can run the program in the following way:

```text
$ python example.py test.json
+-----+
|     |
| x   |
|     |
|   x |
|  x  |
+-----+
```

Now this only uses the default configuration of the `display_data` function and we also want to expose these optional parameters to the command line interface. We can do so by adding a few options:

```python
@click.command()
@click.argument('file')
@click.option('--size', default=5, help='Size of the grid in both dimensions.')
@click.option('--symbol', default='x', help='Symbol for displaying data points.')
@click.option('--empty', default=' ', help='Symbol for displaying empty space.')
def display(file, size, symbol, empty):
    with open(file) as fh:
        data = json.load(fh)['data']
    data = [[int(x) for x in row] for row in data]
    print(display_data(data, size=size, symbol=symbol, empty=empty))
```

But that's a lot of code duplication. We duplicated the parameter names, the default values and the help text from the docstring.
Also if we decide to add a new parameter to `display_data` we need to update the command as well.

This is where `click-inspect` comes in handy. Using the `add_options_from` decorator we can simply add all optional parameters from `display_data` to the `display` command without code duplication:

```python
from click_inspect import add_options_from

@click.command()
@click.argument('file')
@add_options_from(display_data)
def display(file, **kwargs):
    with open(file) as fh:
        data = json.load(fh)['data']
    data = [[int(x) for x in row] for row in data]
    print(display_data(data, **kwargs))
```

### Customization

The `add_options_from` decorator supports various keyword parameters which can be used for
customizing the way options are created from parameters. Please refer to the docstring
of `add_options_from` for more information. In the following some possibilities are shown:

```python
# This adds only the `size` and `empty` parameters as options:
@add_options_from(display_data, include={'size', 'empty'})

# This has a similar effect by excluding the `symbol` parameter:
@add_options_from(display_data, exclude={'symbol'})

# This specifies custom option-names for some of the parameters:
@add_options_from(display_data, names={'size': ['-s', '--size'], 'empty': ['-e', '--empty']})

# This overrides the default value for the `symbol` parameter:
@add_options_from(display_data, custom={'symbol': {'default': '#'}})
```

### Boolean flags

Boolean flags are supported via the `bool` type hint. The default behavior is to create an on-/off-option
as described in the [click docs](https://click.palletsprojects.com/en/7.x/options/#boolean-flags).
If this is undesired, it can be customized by using the `names` keyword parameter of `add_options_from`:

```python
foo: bool = True
# translates to
click.option('--foo/--no-foo', default=True)

# Use the following to create an on-/off-option:
add_options_from(my_func, names={'foo': ['--foo']})
# translates to
click.option('--foo', is_flag=True, default=True)
```

### Lists and tuples

`click-inspect` also supports sequences as type hints (e.g. `list[int]` or `tuple[int, str]`).
Specifically those type hints are translated as follows:

```python
foo: Sequence[int]
foo: List[int]
# translates to
click.option('--foo', multiple=True, type=int)

# -------------------------------------------------- #

foo: Tuple[int, str]
# translates to
click.option('--foo', type=(int, str))
```

These type hints are also supported as part of the docstring:

```python
"""
Args:
    foo (list of int): Equivalent to List[int].
    foo ((int, str)): Equivalent to Tuple[int, str].
"""
```

### Unions

`click-inspect` also supports `typing.Union` by simply selecting the first option as the type.
So `Union[int, str]` is equivalent to `int`.
Unions are also supported as part of the docstring via `int or str`.

### Docstring styles

`click-inspect` supports inspecting [reST-style](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0287/) docstrings, as well as [Google-](https://google.github.io/styleguide/pyguide.html#38-comments-and-docstrings) and [Numpy-style](https://numpydoc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/format.html) docstrings via [`sphinx.ext.napoleon`](https://github.com/sphinx-doc/sphinx/tree/master/sphinx/ext/napoleon).

Commit message:

Fix incorrect resolution of nested type hints

README.md, after:

[![Tests](https://github.com/Dominik1123/click-inspect/workflows/Tests/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Dominik1123/click-inspect/actions?workflow=Tests)
[![Codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/Dominik1123/click-inspect/branch/main/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/Dominik1123/click-inspect)
[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/click-inspect.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/click-inspect/)
[![PyPI pyversions](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/click-inspect.svg?style=flat-square)](https://pypi.org/pypi/click-inspect/)

# click-inspect

*Add options to click commands based on inspecting functions*

## Installation

[`pip install click-inspect`](https://pypi.org/project/click-inspect/)

## Usage

Suppose an application containing an API function for which we would like to expose a command line interface. That function expects one or two arguments with internal data types and a bunch of configuration options. For example:

```python
def display_data(data: List[Tuple[int, int]],
                 *,
                 size: int, symbol: str = 'x', empty: str = ' ') -> str:
    """Display the given data points in a 2D ASCII grid.

    Args:
        data (list of (int, int)): The data points as x- and y-tuples.
        size (int): Size of the grid in both dimensions.
        symbol (str): Symbol for displaying data points.
        empty (str): Symbol for displaying empty space.

    Returns:
        str: The string containing the grid.
    """
    grid = [[empty]*size for _ in range(size)]
    for x, y in data:
        grid[y][x] = symbol
    top = bottom = ('+', *'-'*size, '+')
    grid = (top, *(('|', *row, '|') for row in grid), bottom)
    return '\n'.join(map(''.join, grid))
```

Here the type of the first argument, ``data``, is an internal aspect of the application, but the remaining arguments are generic options.

Now we want to create a [click](https://pypi.org/project/click/) interface for using this function from the command line. Specifically we want it to work on JSON files of the following format:

```json
{"data": [[1, 1], [2, 4], [3, 3]]}
```

So the only thing our command needs to do is to read the JSON file and convert the content in a way that it is compatible with what `display_data` expects:

```python
import json
import click


@click.command()
@click.argument('file')
def display(file):
    with open(file) as fh:
        data = json.load(fh)['data']
    data = [[int(x) for x in row] for row in data]
    print(display_data(data))


if __name__ == '__main__':
    display()
```

Then we can run the program in the following way:

```text
$ python example.py test.json
+-----+
|     |
| x   |
|     |
|   x |
|  x  |
+-----+
```

Now this only uses the default configuration of the `display_data` function and we also want to expose these optional parameters to the command line interface. We can do so by adding a few options:

```python
@click.command()
@click.argument('file')
@click.option('--size', default=5, help='Size of the grid in both dimensions.')
@click.option('--symbol', default='x', help='Symbol for displaying data points.')
@click.option('--empty', default=' ', help='Symbol for displaying empty space.')
def display(file, size, symbol, empty):
    with open(file) as fh:
        data = json.load(fh)['data']
    data = [[int(x) for x in row] for row in data]
    print(display_data(data, size=size, symbol=symbol, empty=empty))
```

But that's a lot of code duplication. We duplicated the parameter names, the default values and the help text from the docstring.
Also if we decide to add a new parameter to `display_data` we need to update the command as well.

This is where `click-inspect` comes in handy. Using the `add_options_from` decorator we can simply add all optional parameters from `display_data` to the `display` command without code duplication:

```python
from click_inspect import add_options_from

@click.command()
@click.argument('file')
@add_options_from(display_data)
def display(file, **kwargs):
    with open(file) as fh:
        data = json.load(fh)['data']
    data = [[int(x) for x in row] for row in data]
    print(display_data(data, **kwargs))
```

### Customization

The `add_options_from` decorator supports various keyword parameters which can be used for
customizing the way options are created from parameters. Please refer to the docstring
of `add_options_from` for more information. In the following some possibilities are shown:

```python
# This adds only the `size` and `empty` parameters as options:
@add_options_from(display_data, include={'size', 'empty'})

# This has a similar effect by excluding the `symbol` parameter:
@add_options_from(display_data, exclude={'symbol'})

# This specifies custom option-names for some of the parameters:
@add_options_from(display_data, names={'size': ['-s', '--size'], 'empty': ['-e', '--empty']})

# This overrides the default value for the `symbol` parameter:
@add_options_from(display_data, custom={'symbol': {'default': '#'}})
```

### Boolean flags

Boolean flags are supported via the `bool` type hint. The default behavior is to create an on-/off-option
as described in the [click docs](https://click.palletsprojects.com/en/7.x/options/#boolean-flags).
If this is undesired, it can be customized by using the `names` keyword parameter of `add_options_from`:

```python
foo: bool = True
# translates to
click.option('--foo/--no-foo', default=True)

# Use the following to create an on-/off-option:
add_options_from(my_func, names={'foo': ['--foo']})
# translates to
click.option('--foo', is_flag=True, default=True)
```

### Lists and tuples

`click-inspect` also supports sequences as type hints (e.g. `list[int]` or `tuple[int, str]`).
Specifically those type hints are translated as follows:

```python
foo: Sequence[int]
foo: List[int]
# translates to
click.option('--foo', multiple=True, type=int)

# -------------------------------------------------- #

foo: Tuple[int, str]
# translates to
click.option('--foo', type=(int, str))
```

These type hints are also supported as part of the docstring:

```python
"""
Args:
    foo (list of int): Equivalent to List[int].
    foo ((int, str)): Equivalent to Tuple[int, str].
"""
```

### Unions

`click-inspect` also supports `typing.Union` by simply selecting the first option as the type.
So `Union[int, str]` is equivalent to `int`.<sup>(1)</sup>
Unions are also supported as part of the docstring via `int or str`.

### Docstring styles

`click-inspect` supports inspecting [reST-style](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0287/) docstrings, as well as [Google-](https://google.github.io/styleguide/pyguide.html#38-comments-and-docstrings) and [Numpy-style](https://numpydoc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/format.html) docstrings via [`sphinx.ext.napoleon`](https://github.com/sphinx-doc/sphinx/tree/master/sphinx/ext/napoleon).

-----

<sup>(1) If the Union is part of a generic type, it is not guaranteed that the first option is the same one that is displayed in the Union literal. This is because generic types cache their `__getitem__` methods. For that reason `List[Union[int, str]] is List[Union[str, int]]` and the selected type would be `int` in both cases since that's the one that got cached.</sup>
